me now our two state officials central
to making decisions about whether when
and again their state should reopen I'm
dr. Scott Harris he's the state health
officer for the Alabama Department of
Public Health and dr. janae called oomp
chief deputy director for health for the
Michigan Department of Health and Human
Services thank you both for joining and
so I want to start with you dr. Harris
since Alabama's doing a little more
opening right now than Michigan although
you're compared to some of your southern
neighbors I would argue you guys are
being a bit more cautious than others
but tell me the metrics you used that
gave you and the the confidence to
advise the governor at beginning some
phase denry Openings sure so we have
followed a number of metrics like I
think most states have including the
white house plan for reopening the
gating criteria that I'm sure you've
talked about many times on this show
we're certainly part of the things that
we consider we have not fully satisfied
all of those gaining criteria in terms
of cases per day but we felt very good
about our syndromic surveillance numbers
we vote very good about our Hospital
capacity and so what our governor chose
to do was to make a very measured step a
very gradual reopening of certain types
of businesses the we did not proceed to
a full phase 1 reopening like was in the
white house plan things like
entertainment venues and gyms and in in
person dining we have not chosen to do
that so far but we think this is just a
gradual first step what data are you
missing dr. Harris that you wish you had
but you just whether it's capacity or
other reasons you don't have yeah there
are a number of things there I think
clearly we would like to make sure we're
testing to the to the level that we
would like um we probably have a total
amount of laboratory bench capacity to
do the number of tests that we would
like to do but that those tests are
really unevenly distributed throughout
the state if you're in a bigger more
urbanized part of our state like
Jefferson County where Birmingham and
located or Madison County and where
Huntsville located so you can probably
have really good access to testing
whenever you like but in some of our
more rural parts of the state we
able to get testing done but they're
definitely barriers there for people to
obtain that particularly if they have to
find transportation or they don't have
ready access to a healthcare provider
and we've also been surprised to find
that we have not necessarily gotten
negative test results reported to us
it's hard to come up with a good
denominator so that we know the percent
positive test we have and and so it we
have reached out to all the labs who
report to the to us but many of them out
of state and it's just difficult to get
all that information dr. Calhoun let me
ask the question sort of a slightly
different what are you seeing in your
state that makes you uncomfortable
advising the governor to begin even a
partial phase one reopening yeah so here
in the state of Michigan we have over
forty three thousand cases and over four
thousand deaths and so we are actually
third in the country when it comes to
states in the number of deaths while
we've seen certainly significant
improvements over the past several weeks
our hospitals were over capacity
particularly in the southeast area of
the state several weeks ago we are still
having parts of the state that are
seeing an increase in the rate of rise
of cases and we know that their hospital
capacity is not what it should be we
have to get our testing up as I know
people across the country are working on
so while we are cautiously optimistic
we still think we need to be very
careful all right but doctor caldron
what do you say to those in the state
are going you know what
yes southeast Michigan is being hit hard
are you not comfortable having sort of a
let's isolate parts of the state tougher
stay at home measures for Southeast
Michigan let's loosen things up in more
rural parts of the state why are you not
there yet
so we actually look at this data on a
daily basis regionally and so again we
are still seeing for example on the
western side of the state that there are
actually increases in the rate of rise
of cases we have several outbreaks there
we also know again in some of our rural
areas the number of hospital visits
actually not what it should be if many
of our hospitals in our rural areas are
actually at capacity so every part of
the state is different even in southeast
quite frankly even though we're seeing a
decrease
in the rate of rise we're still seeing
many many cases and many deaths every
day so we're gonna be working on
loosening or dialing up as far as how we
opening the economy the governor has
actually already started that but we
really have to do it in a incremental
data-driven approach
I got imagine both of you are feeling
pressure whether it's pressure from
friends and family tired of the
quarantine
pressure from friends of yours who maybe
run businesses or full-on political
pressure doctor called in let me start
with you how have you handled it and if
you've been getting have you handled the
public blowback and how do you strike
that balance in your own head where you
feel like you're giving full on medical
advice versus let me give you the best
medical advice I can for the policy you
want to implement so you know this is
certainly not personal people hire me to
give medical and public health advice if
that is what I do I talked to the
governor and and and other folks in the
governor's office on a regular basis to
tell them the facts these are the number
of tests that we are currently doing
this is where we want to be this is
what's going on with our hospitals and
again if we don't do well with these
social distancing measures more people
will die and that is just the facts dr.
Harris how of you how much have you felt
that pressure I mean obviously it's
significant as you know I mean there are
you know many Alabamians that just don't
have the option of making a living you
know under certain health orders we have
to find a way to strike the right
balance there I think our governor
Governor Ivy has done a great job of
trying to balance the health of the
economy with the health of every talib
ambiens my job in public health is to
give her the best health information I
can we present the data on just as dr.
Calhoun said on how many cases we have
and what our deaths look like um I think
Alabama has been a little bit different
you know every every state is different
and there's you know 51 different plans
for reopening I guess because we're all
trying to look at the data and make our
own decisions you know with the best
information that we have about how to
proceed but but
there there are people who are certainly
want to maintain their livelihoods they
want to maintain their businesses and we
have to balance that with with keeping
everyone safe and healthy as much as
possible dr. Harris are you concerned
that Georgia has been more aggressive
and you know for instance senator doug
jones in alabama has encouraged
Alabamians to be careful traveling to
georgia well it's obviously we look at
that very closely you know there's
certainly some good aspects about having
you know every state having its own plan
because every state is a little bit
different but but clearly you know all
states affect the others and so we're
watching that very carefully you know
what we've done in Alabama I think is
again have the sort of measured approach
and that I think what I've heard many
states say and what our governor has
certainly said is that these aren't
steps forward that are just going to
ratchet forward and can never come back
you know these are gradual steps and and
we certainly you know will consider
dialing things back if we see in
increasing cases and so I think that's
the approach that probably all states
would want to take we see where we are
after changes are made and then changes
necessary dr. Calhoun in Michigan dr.
Harrison Alabama thank you both for
sharing your expertise in the sort of
the regional observations that you both
are both can share with the country good
luck and stay healthy out there hello
from Washington I'm Chuck Todd and
thanks for checking out the Meet the
Press channel on YouTube click on the
button down here to subscribe and click
over here to watch the latest interviews
highlights and other digital exclusives